+++
title = 'Determinism in Buddhist Thinking'
date = '2025-01-09'
math = true
+++
#### Level 3

Here, I'm going to go examine a few ways of proving where **incompatibilist** free will holds in our [truth hierarchy](https://maliknyc.github.io/karmagambler.github.io/posts/post-7/).

It's important to remember that incompatibilism does not entail determinism, but rather that free will and determinism are mutually exclusive. Thus, if we can establish that Buddhism describes determinism at some levels of truth, we can also establish that incompatibilist free will does not hold at those levels. Because Level 4 is based on realization rather than principles and introduces concepts of emptiness that undermine principled analyses of phenomena, exploring determinism – which relies on deductive reasoning – at this level or beyond may not be particularly meaningful. Instead, we should focus on Level 3 truths, which are in themselves based on cause and effect.

Here, perhaps the most apparent sign of determinism in Buddhism is the doctrine of dependent origination (pratītyasamutpāda): the idea that no phenomena exist independently, arise without a cause, or are unconditioned (Tricycle 2023). It, definitionally, seems to imply determinism. To be sure, we will still look for holes. Perhaps the most prevalent form of indeterminism is the rejection of determinism in favor of the existence of chance. This chance-based form of indeterminism has roots in Epicureanism, with its concept of the random atomic 'swerve' (Lucretius 2017, 289–293), and Aristotelianism, which recognized chance as a cause of certain events (Aristotle 2017, 17). Over time, it has become nearly synonymous with indeterminism as a whole, largely due to the Copenhagen interpretation's popularization of the idea that quantum events are probabilistically indeterminate (Faye 2024). Although the Buddha seemingly discouraged the reliance on luck, it's less clear whether he, along with other seminal Buddhist philosophers, explicitly rejected the existence of chance (Dhammika 1996). However, by thinking through the implications of dependent origination, we can deduce an answer to whether Buddhism allows for probabilistic indeterminism.

Let's consider a framework where \(S_t\) represents the complete set of all causally relevant conditions at a given time \(t\), and let \(O\) represent the set of all possible mutually exclusive outcomes that could follow. Dependent origination tells us that no phenomenon arises independently or without causes and conditions. On a strong reading, this means not merely that every outcome is causally conditioned, but that a complete causal basis must be sufficient to fix its outcome. Then, the same complete state \(S_t\) cannot give rise to two distinct outcomes \(O_1\) and \(O_2\). For if \(S_t\) were compatible with both \(O_1\) and \(O_2\), then \(S_t\) wouldn't be sufficient to explain why \(O_1\) occurred rather than \(O_2\), or vice-versa. Some further differentiating condition would still be required. But \(S_t\) was defined as already containing the complete set of causally relevant conditions, so no such further condition could remain. Therefore, each complete state \(S_i\) must determine exactly one outcome in \(O\). Thus, dependent origination leaves no room for true probabilistic indeterminism. Probabilities can arise in mundane conventional truths, but they only reflect practical representations of known conditions; the conditions within \( A \) are vast and often unobtainable, yet they must exist as Level 3 truths to necessitate the outcomes in \( C \).


If, given a specific set of initial conditions, there is only one possible future history that can unfold, then the universe must have “perfect predictability” – the idea that knowing all relevant conditions and laws of a system at a given moment could allow one to unfailingly predict its exact future state. In turn, if the universe has perfect predictability, it must be deterministic. To understand why it goes both ways here, we can use this same framework. Let us reframe "perfect predictability" as follows: given complete knowledge of the total causally relevant state \(S_t\), it is possible to determine with certainty the exact outcome in \(O\). The point follows from the same reasoning as before. If a complete state \(S_t\) were compatible with multiple outcomes, then some further differentiating condition would be needeed in order to predict which one would occur. But if such a further condition were needed, then \(S_t\) would not have been a complete specification of all causally relevant conditions in the first place. Therefore, if the total state is genuinely complete, perfect predictability requires that only one outcome be compatible with it. Of course, perfect predictability does not imply that we, in practice, could perfectly predict the future. As mentioned, the complete state \(S_t\) is practically unattainable, and even if we were somehow able to access it, we would almost certainly still lack the understanding of the relevant laws and processes needed to predict the exact future outcome with certainty.

This brings us to another angle for tackling the question of Buddhist determinism: examining the nature of the Buddha’s omniscience. If we were able to find that the Buddha’s omniscience entailed perfect predictive ability\(^2\) – the kind that is only possible in a universe with perfect predictability – then we could say the Buddha lived in a deterministic universe. While there is still some ambiguity and contention about the exact nature of the Buddha’s omniscience, there is also ample evidence from Buddhist texts and subsequent scholarly interpretations to suggest that his foresight did align with our concept of perfect predictive ability. In the *Aṅguttara Nikāya*, the Buddha affirms that he knows all that is seen, heard, sensed, and cognized by the humans and deities in the world (Bodhi 2012, 4.24). Here, he is attributing to himself an “omniscience” of everything that all other beings cognize at the present time, but not a special knowledge of the future. The *Tevijjavacchasutta* describes the Buddha’s “threefold knowledge”: the ability to recall past lives in detail, the “divine eye” to see beings passing away and reappearing according to their actions, and the direct realization of liberation (Ñāṇamoli and Bodhi 1995, 588). This also does not ascribe to the Buddha a direct knowledge of the future; rather, it reiterates his profound understanding of all events that have already occurred. Yet, in the *Cūḷasakuludāyisutta*, the Buddha affirms that he can answer any question about the future as well. There, he states that if someone with superhuman clairvoyance asked him about future events, he could satisfy their query. Since this hypothetical interlocutor could presumably verify the correctness of the Buddha’s response, the Buddha is claiming that his answers about the future are perfectly accurate.

Although the *Aṅguttara Nikāya* and *Tevijjavacchasutta* only concretely establish the lower bound of the Buddha’s knowledge, Alexander Berzin proposes a compelling resolution regarding the upper bound by pointing out that, within the Buddhist framework, future phenomena do not already exist waiting somewhere. As such, if there are no existent future phenomena for the Buddha to observe, then the Buddha cannot directly observe the future. Berzin also corroborates that the Buddha’s knowledge of future outcomes is exact, explaining that because the Buddha “can cognize all the causal factors … [he] knows exactly what will ripen from each karmic tendency” (Berzin 2018). If it's true both that the Buddha did not have direct clairvoyance and also that he could perfectly assess future outcomes, then it seems to follow that the Buddha did have perfect predictive ability, which in turn necessitates a deterministic universe. Consequently, we can say that, within the Buddhist framework, incompatibilist free will fails to hold at Level 3.

## Notes
1. That is, where one and the same supposedly complete causal state would still be compatible with multiple distinct outcomes.
2. If the Buddha had perfect predictive ability as opposed to some *predeterministic* power that grants direct vision into a predetermined future. This is an important distinction: perfect predictability entails strict determinism, not predeterminism – the idea that all future events have already been decided.

# References
**Tricycle.** 2023. *Dependent Origination.* In *Buddhism for Beginners*, an initiative of Tricycle: The Buddhist Review. [https://tricycle.org/beginners/buddhism/dependent-origination/](https://tricycle.org/beginners/buddhism/dependent-origination/).

**Lucretius.** 2017. *On the Nature of Things*. Translated by William Ellery Leonard. [http://data.perseus.org/citations/urn:cts:latinLit:phi0550.phi001.perseus-eng1:2.216-2.293](http://data.perseus.org/citations/urn:cts:latinLit:phi0550.phi001.perseus-eng1:2.216-2.293).

**Aristotle.** 2017. *Physics*. Edited by Gregory Koutrouby. Translated by R. P. Hardie and R. K. Gaye. Mineola, NY: Dover Publications. A republication of the 1930 edition. ISBN 978-0-486-81351-6.

**Faye, Jan.** 2024. "Copenhagen Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics." In *The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy* (Summer 2024 Edition), edited by Edward N. Zalta and Uri Nodelman. [https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2024/entries/qm-copenhagen/](https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2024/entries/qm-copenhagen/).

**Dhammika, S.** 1996. "Good Luck and Fate." In *Good Question, Good Answer*. Buddha Dharma Education Association. [https://www.buddhanet.net/e-learning/qanda09/](https://www.buddhanet.net/e-learning/qanda09/).

**Bodhi, Bhikkhu.** 2012. *The Numerical Discourses of the Buddha: A Translation of the Aṅguttara Nikāya*. Boston: Wisdom Publications. [https://suttacentral.net/an4.24/en/bodhi](https://suttacentral.net/an4.24/en/bodhi).

**Ñāṇamoli, Bhikkhu, and Bhikkhu Bodhi, trans.** 1995. *The Middle Length Discourses of the Buddha: A Translation of the Majjhima Nikāya*. Boston: Wisdom Publications.

**Berzin, Alexander.** 2018. "A Buddha's Omniscience of the Three Times." In *A Buddha's Knowledge of the Past, Present, and Future*. Study Buddhism. Berzin Archives e.V. December 27, 2018. [https://studybuddhism.com/en/advanced-studies/abhidharma-tenet-systems/time-the-universe/a-buddha-s-knowledge-of-the-past-present-and-future/a-buddha-s-omniscience-of-the-three-times](https://studybuddhism.com/en/advanced-studies/abhidharma-tenet-systems/time-the-universe/a-buddha-s-knowledge-of-the-past-present-and-future/a-buddha-s-omniscience-of-the-three-times).
